Part C Non-Functional Testing of Rest API
Two types of non-functional testing will be implemented in part C of the project. Performance Testing
using Dynamic Analysis and Static Analysis of the source code.
Performance Testing
Create a program which creates objects based on the API explored in part A of the project. Populate
these objects with random data.
Adapt unit test code from Part A to measure the time to complete a create, delete or change object
operation.
Perform the following experiments:
o As the number of objects increases measure the time required to add, delete, or change the
objects.
Use operating system tools or open-source tools to track CPU percent use and Available Free Memory
while each experiment takes place.
Operating system tools that may support dynamic analysis include:
Windows perfmon
Mac Activity Monitor
Linux vmstat
Static Analysis
The source code of the Rest API to do list manager will be studied with any available static analysis tool
which supports analysis of the Java code base of the “rest api todo list manager”.
Students may choose the community edition of the Sonar Cube static analysis tool. Due to JDK
compatibility requirements with the project software, teams must use a 2023 version of SonarQube (such
as SonarQube 9.9 LTS) for the static analysis portion. This version is still officially supported and can be
downloaded from the SonarQube historical downloads page:
https://www.sonarsource.com/products/sonarqube/downloads/historical-
downloads/
Recommendations should be made regarding changes to the source code to minimize risk during future
modifications, enhancements, or bug fixes. Teams should look at code complexity, code statement
counts, and any technical risks, technical debt or code smells highlighted by the static analysis.
Performance Test Suite Video
Show video of all performance tests running in the teams selected development environment.
Written Report
Target report size is between 5 and 10 pages.
Summarizes deliverables.
Describes implementation of performance test suite.
ECSE-429 Project Winter 2026 Semester
8
Include charts (excel or other tool) showing transaction time, memory use and cpu use versus
number of objects for each experiment.
Summarize any recommendations for code enhancements related to results of performance
testing.
Highlight any observed performance risks.
Describes implementation of static analysis with Sonar Cube community edition.
Include recommendations for improving code based on the result of the static analysis.
ECSE-429 Project Winter 2026 Semester
9
Summary of clean code guidelines from Bob Martin.
Understandability tips
o Be consistent. If you do something a certain way, do all similar things in the same way.
o Use explanatory variables.
o Encapsulate boundary conditions. Boundary conditions are hard to keep track of. Put the
processing for them in one place.
o Prefer dedicated value objects to primitive type.
o Avoid logical dependency. Don't write methods which works correctly depending on something
else in the same class.
o Avoid negative conditionals.
Names rules
o Choose descriptive and unambiguous names.
o Make meaningful distinction.
o Use pronounceable names.
o Use searchable names.
o Replace magic numbers with named constants.
o Avoid encodings. Do not append prefixes or type information.
Functions rules
o Small.
o Do one thing.
o Use descriptive names.
o Prefer fewer arguments.
o Have no side effects.
o Don't use flag arguments. Split method into several independent methods that can be called
from the client without the flag.
Comments rules
o Always try to explain yourself in code.
o Don't be redundant.
o Don't add obvious noise.
o Don't use closing brace comments.
o Don't comment out code. Just remove.
o Use as explanation of intent.
o Use as clarification of code.
o Use as warning of consequences.
Source code structure
o Separate concepts vertically.
o Related code should appear vertically dense.
o Declare variables close to their usage.
ECSE-429 Project Winter 2026 Semester
10
o Dependent functions should be close.
o Similar functions should be close.
o Place functions in the downward direction.
o Keep lines short.
o Don't use horizontal alignment.
o Use white space to associate related things and disassociate weakly related.
o Don't break indentation.
o Objects and data structures
o Hide internal structure.
o Prefer data structures.
o Avoid hybrids structures (half object and half data).
o Should be small.
o Do one thing.
o Small number of instance variables.
o Base class should know nothing about their derivatives.
o Better to have many functions than to pass some code into a function to select a behavior.
o Prefer non-static methods to static methods.
Tests
o Readable.
o Fast.
o Independent.
o Repeatable.
Avoid Code smells
o Rigidity. The software is difficult to change. A small change causes a cascade of subsequent
changes.
o Fragility. The software breaks in many places due to a single change.
o Immobility. You cannot reuse parts of the code in other projects because of involved risks and
high effort.
o Needless Complexity.
o Needless Repetition.
o Opacity. The code is hard to understand